AI is everywhere and it's evolving super
super fast Chad GPT has made it where my
mom and dad can now tell me how to do my
job
better and we were generating a lot of
leads 60 plusk leads a month we bought
another tool called answer the public
for $8.6 million and started rinse and
repeating the Playbook that's how you
stand out when everyone else is using Ai
and is doing the same Waldo stuff as
everyone
else so there's probably been a a lot of
talks about AI some of you guys may be
sick about hearing about Ai and today
I'm going to give you something a little
bit different instead of focusing on AI
I'm going to teach you guys how to win
when everyone is using Ai and it's a
simple strategy and a concept it's not
that complex anyone can do it you know
we're here in Boston with some of the
smartest colleges in the world har MIT I
wasn't smart enough to get into any of
them so if I can use this strategy all
you guys
can so my name is Neil Patel uh I'm the
co-founder of Ad Agency called NP
digital work with a lot of different
clients won tons of different
Awards um you know and I've seen a lot
of things we've proven that we we've
taken a look at a lot of the data that
these Enterprise companies are using and
we figured out patterns from it right so
today when I break down how to win when
everyone's using AI keep in mind
is coming from a place where I'm seeing
a lot of data what big corporations are
using cuz most of our clients at NP
digital are Fortune 100 or Global 5,000
companies the first thing to know is and
you guys know this AI is everywhere and
it's evolving super super fast and if
you look at the study from McKenzie
pretty much around 50 to 60% of
companies have adopted AI over the past
few years and that's a lot but the big
change here and this is nothing new is
actually the shift to the mainstream
what's happened is chat GPT has made it
where my mom and dad can now tell me how
to do my job better they literally log
in and they were like Neil did you know
this and I'm like Mom did you know that
or did chat GPT know that and she's like
well I know it CU I read it from Chad
GPT and it's come to a place where it's
so so
mainstream that people are using it for
research or learning anything new if you
look at how long it took Netflix to gain
over a million users it was literally
you know if you look at the time frame
it was literally 40 plus months while
chat GPT was 5 days just think about
that five
days they beat Instagram they beat
Facebook they beat Twitter the only one
that I think that beat chat
GPT was um what is that new social app
called from Facebook
threads and I already kind of forgot the
name so it shows you how many people are
still using it
probably not trying to throw shade on
threads but I think we all went back to
X or Twitter and Chad GPT or open AI is
one of the most popular websites on the
internet at least according to similar
web I believe it ranks number 26 from a
global rank perspective could change
dayto day but last time I checked before
I had to turn in my deck on to HubSpot
it was number
26 and with
AI it's evolving at a really rapid Pace
it's just like there's weeks that go by
and it's like have we really progressed
this fast in such a short period of time
look at Mid journey and how they evolved
in just 1.4 years the image to the left
versus the right is a massive difference
you're not going to use the image to the
left in a marketing campaign image to
the right right it looks like oh you
paid money for it nope use mid Journey
but here's the
thing AI will not just transform
marketing it will cause a lot of
problems for marketers as well anyone
want to guess what the number one
problem
is it's what I call the Waldo problem
have you guys seen where's Waldo
before right the person red and white
hat funny story is I once lived in
Seattle and for a gift
someone gave me a where's Waldo photo
and it was a good friend of mine and
they convinced my concierge to let him
in and they hung it up in my bathroom
and instead of Waldo the face was of me
but in a red and white striped shirt
with a hat so then every time someone
went to go pee in my bathroom pee ended
up everywhere and they laughed and I had
to clean it up but the problem with
marketing is if we're all using the same
technology how do you really win content
will look alike you know if you tell
chat GPT or barred hey how can I improve
conversions on this page and we've asked
them that many times they start giving a
lot of similar suggestions so if
everyone starts making the same changes
how do you make yourself stand up from
the
crowd and with AI there's a lot of risk
people believe that their content won't
be optimized for SEO or that AA could
beide inaccurate
information you guys hear about the
lawyer who got into trouble by by using
chat GPT for his case well you did now
don't do it a lawyer got in trouble
because there was things in there that
was inacurate probably wasn't a good La
in the first place content will also
sound too similar you know back in the
day when I was a marketer we had
something called a Content spinner you
upload a few articles and it outputs
something new AI is a modern version of
that in which it scrapes the web looks
at all the old data and creates
something new but it's basing it off the
old data so so how are you going to
really stand out and separate yourself
in when when everyone's using these kind
of tools and they're using it when it
comes to at least marketing for creating
content analyzing their data and
analytics and check this out all right
be honest and I want you guys to look
out look around the room how many of you
log into your analytics at least once a
week literally raise your hand you'll be
shocked okay look around the room it's
lesson 10% and check this out how many
of you log into your analytics raise
your hand and make changes based on the
data at least once a month my guess is
50 people raise their hand 60 70 maybe
most people don't log into their
analytics and if they log in they don't
really make any changes with AI that's
going to change people are going to
start making changes based on what the
AI tells them they're also learning how
to do things and conducting
research so if everyone's using
AI what's
left well whether you love her or hate
her you could build a personal brand
like the
Kardashians they' done exceptionally
well I know a lot of people talk trash
on them but you know what they've done
exceptionally well in business can't
knock them for it whether Kylie Jenner
is a billionaire or not she's done well
with her Kylie Cosmetics
brand but to build that personal brand
like Kylie Jenner or Kim Kardashian or
anyone who's pop on social media there's
this factor and I don't care what anyone
tells you it's a big hit or miss game
it's not just about right timing it's
about do people resonate with
you you know I once went to a conference
and I was talking to this guy named
Perry and Perry used to run this event
called digital marketer and I was like
and uh they had a you know their own
event called like war room and Perry's
like you've done a really good job
building your personal man but Perry's
done a lot of the stuff I did and so has
his uh partner Ryan Dice and Perry's
like you know what I think's worked for
you that didn't work for us I was like
what they're like you're that token
nerdy Brown dude that people could
resonate
with I can't replicate that or other
people can't it was just my genetics
just like I don't have hair right but
there that X Factor in branding it's
just like what makes that dude on the
longboard drinking cranber juice going
to work super popular you guys know who
I'm talking about that was a while ago
but still there's that X Factor there
must be another strategy that works that
doesn't have to do much with AI and
there
is we used it to build our Ad Agency NPD
to over nine figures a year and we ended
up getting to number 21 on the Inc 500
list the first year that we got on there
and our team was really happy I wasn't
so much I'm like 21's a useless number
unless you're playing Blackjack I'm like
it's not even in the top 10 but you know
we digressed my team was really happy
with it I had a fake celebrate to show
enthusiasm um but it worked really well
and it wasn't just me who used this
strategy actually dares at HubSpot used
it before I did I wasn't the first one
to come up with it and hubf used it to
build a 25 plus billion dollar company
again they could be worth more a little
bit less I don't know what their latest
stock price is but this was a screenshot
call it maybe a month or so ago but
either way that's a massive company
right HubSpot used it much more
effectively than I did they've grown
much faster than I have they've been
around longer but still their numbers
are extraordinary you know even if you
look at their earnings are growing at 20
to 30% per year even in this economy so
what's the secret and no it's not AI
it's a simple concept and you can do it
in both B2B and B Toc you give away P
something for free that people are used
to paying for and you sell them
something
bigger all right and I'm going to give
you example of it hubs how many people
here pay for hubs spa or use their
product almost everyone should be
raising their hand all
right website grater is by HubSpot have
you guys used website grader raise your
hand if you have okay you guys should
all check it out most of you guys did
not raise your head check it out it's a
free tool from hubot they don't sell you
anything there is no premium that oh use
this feature and you pay for more
website grader they just give it away
for free do you want to know why hubot
gives it away for free it causes a lot
of people to become into their ecosystem
once they get you into their ecosystem
what do they sell you
HubSpot and it's not just them galat has
run promos where they give away free
razors well if you buy a razor you only
need one handle but what do you need to
keep replacing the blades you're giving
away something for
free and you're making money selling
something that's much
bigger in which razors right there's
much more money to be made continually
selling the razor blades than there is
to sell the
handle now at NP digital the strategy we
use I started the company a little bit
more than 5 years ago and we were really
fast to grow to nine figures we did it
without venture
funding and I was like wait more people
spend money on marketing Services than
marketing software if you look at
marketing services and I have a chart on
this later on and marketing labor if you
combine both those two it makes up
roughly 49% of marketing spend the rest
is on tools and marketing ads like ads
like on Google or Facebook so I'm like
wait if I give away a lot of tools for
free even if they're not as good as a
competition but if I give away stuff
that they're used to paying for and and
just make them 100% free I can upsell
them on something that is a bigger pie
the bigger pie for me was marketing
Services now I could have run this
Playbook on marketing software but
someone already ran it before me HubSpot
right they gave away marketing greater
for free sell them on
HubSpot and it did really well we
started climbing up in visitor count and
we started generating a lot of leads and
we did this with two two products and
I'll show you that in a bit and we are
generating a lot of leads now in the
chart it looks like our leads went down
but we are collecting leads from a
global basis like in places like Croatia
and Romania all great places and
countries but we weren't we didn't
actually have staff to service companies
in those regions from a service base so
what we started doing is we stopped
putting those leads into our CRM to save
money less records you start paying it
starts costing money you have a lot of
sales reps I was like there's no point
in passing in all these leads if we're
not going to call them pass in the leads
for the regions we actually service but
I can bump it back up to 60 plusk leads
a month so here's how the model works
and I'm going to break this down again
you can do this in both B2B and B to C
first you find a big Tam Tam stands for
total addressable
Market all right HubSpot is in a big
Market they're not just in marketing
tools they're also in CRM they're taking
a slice out of Salesforce as well that's
a big Market if you find something
that's really massive if you give away
something for free you still have this
massive thing to
sell and then that leads me to step two
you give away something for free that
people are used to paying for now here's
an example of this a lot of you guys
work for a company or have a business
use payroll software paychecks is a
massive Payroll Company it's $40 billion
but you know what else every single
employee wants at least in
America health
insurance United Healthcare is worth
more than 10 times from a market Captain
paychecks they're not the only health
insurance company in
town literally $451 billion Market over
$40 billion Market payroll software does
not have to be expensive it could be
free you create a free payroll
software and you get businesses
onboarded you start selling them on
insurance health insurance life
insurance for their employees
401K you see what I'm saying you give
away something for free that people are
used to paying for because everyone's
used to paying for payroll software and
you make money charging for something
bigger it's amazing mouse trap right
Gillette same thing let me give you away
free razors cuz I know you're going to
end up buying a lot of blades for me in
the long run another another example we
did this at NP digital if you look here
23% of marketing spend is to agencies
23.7 another
24.9% is labor see people pay my Ad
Agency for agency services and labor so
that's making up close let's call it 48
49% somewhere around there a little bit
less than 50% that's a big market so I'm
giving away a lot of marketing
technology for free which is around 25
5% of the market to try to gobble up
another bigger portion and my
competition is wpp Omnicom publicist
right the big holding companies they're
not doing it it's a very unique strategy
that allows me to take away clients from
these
guys step three create your free product
or buy it we bought a tool uh called
Uber suggest back in the day for around
$120,000 I put in around3 million to5
million in it for shits and giggles to
try to make it better um and I didn't
end up leveraging this strategy on
purpose it was more of an accident I was
going through a midlife crisis I'm 38
now I was much younger back then but I
was like what is there to do in life you
know didn't really care for a big home
didn't really care for Ferraris I drive
a Honda Odyssey love that thing you push
buttons the doors open your kids hop
right in such a cool
car they should give me a free one
because I could be a spokesperson but
you know so I was going through this
midlife Cris what should I do so I was
like you know it' be
fun give away a lot of the features that
my competition charges for or software
priers for free it was just literally a
random experiment and I was spending
millions of dollars cuz I didn't know
what else to do in life and it just
became more and more popular I started
collecting a lot of leads and my salese
at my Ad Agency were like hey Neil let's
call them up do you mind if we start
calling like sure do whatever you want
and I was like huh it really quickly
turned into 40% of our new
customers nine figure agency generating
40 plus% of it from one tool not tool
Revenue but literally sales reps calling
up people who are using the tool be like
hey you're using the tool do you want to
just to pay us and we'll just do
everything for you people like yeah
sounds good and we're getting leads from
companies like Venetian and wi which are
hotels all the way to Windam which is
another hotel to Honda and Mitsubishi to
Nike to Target it was a very effective
strategy so effective that we bought
another tool called answer the public
for $8.6 million and started rinse and
repeating the Playbook because it had
roughly 70% of the traffic that Uber
cedus had they just never ran that
Playbook and they wanted ax ebaa so in
other words we we spent eight times
profit buying it but we didn't care we
overpaid for it on the buy but we knew
the moment we picked up the phone we
would make way more than our money back
with in roughly 12 months and the
numbers end up panning out it didn't
take us 12 months we're a little slow to
integrate um just due to headcount and
bureaucracy once you grow a company to 4
or 500 employees a thousand plus
employees Etc you start having layers
things just move slower and if you're
going to buy it like I did make sure you
look for tools or anything that's free
out there with brand queries brand
queries is when someone's doing a search
on Google a lot of times they'll type in
the domain name in the URL bar or just
type in the brand name in the URL uh in
the search bar if they type in the brand
name that means that site has good brand
Affinity those are good buys typically
if you're going to build it you can
Kickstart it with things like product
hunt Tech crunch just getting press out
there and if you don't want to build it
and you don't have the money to buy it
you can use sites like code Canyon or
you can use AI tools to help you start
building the tools um Chad GPT coded the
gting of pong in 60 seconds you can do
this with literally anything that's
related to your ideal
customer now step four once you've built
it you got to keep adding features I
love this quote from Peter theal first
mover isn't what's important it's the
last mover like Microsoft was the last
operating system and Google was the last
search
engine in other words if you're the last
mover you can see all the mistakes
others did and then adapt base on that
so when I bought Uber suggest the first
version that I adjusted it to was hey
let me just give you a lot of keyword
data I did deal with sem Rush took their
data popped it in there showed it to
everyone people weren't too happy with
it got feedback then I started adding in
more features like a keyword overview
giving you more ideas for keywords
telling you who's ranking on Google for
a lot of
terms and then I just kept adding more
and more features from my competition
the book was simple last mover's
Advantage you take what other people are
charging for and you literally give it
away for free as long as your cost is
very small or what you're selling is so
massive it makes up for your cost and
then I just kept going because I was
crazy this was during my midlife crisis
phase my wife also make always makes a
joke with me she's like if your midlife
crisis was when you're around 32 what's
going to happen when you're 50 and I
said honey you'll find out you married
me through thick and thin so
you know she'll have to deal with
it so then I started adding more
features 4.0 hey let me give you content
ideas I took this and jacked it from buz
sumo and people could hate and say hey
you're copying
others but I'm not the only one who does
this the reality is what did Facebook do
to Twitter they copied it with threads
what do you think Instagram did with
Snapchat what do you think they did with
Tik Tok What do you think YouTube did
with Tik Tok and Instagram they're like
oh YouTube shorts oh Instagram reals all
I'm getting at this is the way business
Works whether you like it or not it's
reality and if you just keep adding more
features that people are used to paying
for like I did here and here and here
and here as you can see I just kept
going and going it went so crazy that I
stopped blogging and saying hey uberis
8.0 and I didn't do 9.0 it's just too
much
but if you look at all the features I
added it was just so many I started
building such a massive audience and I
could sell them on almost anything
related to anything marketing because
that's what they're using the tools for
and again you can do this in B2B B to C
there was a company called AA brush that
was selling Dental products now the
company eventually up ended up selling
and what AA brush did was saying free
Tongue Cleaner all right free Tongue
Cleaner but then they would get you be
like hey your tongue isn't the only
problem with bad breath it's also the
toothpaste and the mouthwash and all
these other kind of things and they
would just sell you on all this other
stuff it was a really good Trojan
Horse and then once you give away a lot
of stuff for free you need to either
collect leads or emails and you keep
selling them on other stuff so for
example we collect in the last 30 days
148,000
emails and with those emails we
promote a lot of our products and
services now the key with this strategy
and this is what most people get wrong
is what you give away for free has to be
a
value so for
example if you are creating a photo
product where people can print pictures
and all this kind of stuff you're
selling a camera and you're just like
I'm going to create a free photo shop
competitor well there's a ton of free
photo editing apps out there canva photo
so if you're trying to sell cameras and
creating a free photo app it's not that
effective because people have done it
over and over and over
again but on the flip side if I'm
selling health
insurance if you Google right now for a
free payroll solution there's not tons
of options but anyone who uses payroll
assuming their company grows eventually
they'll have to start thinking about
health insurance and it's your trojan
horse in
there and look with ai ai will make your
marketing most efficient but it won't
really help you stand out and it doesn't
mean that you shouldn't use AI I'm not
here to knock it I do believe it is the
future I do think it's great anyone
who's not leveraging AI is making a big
mistake but relying on
AI as your sole solution for everything
marketing related is a going to be a big
failure and the reason being is a lot of
companies already doing this I literally
speak no joke at least four times a
month some days it's so bad that I'm
flying from country to Country like next
week I got a break because I had to go
to some school thing for my daughter but
the week after I head to Brazil and then
from Brazil I head to Mexico and then
from there I head to Florida Florida and
then from Florida I head back home to
see my kids home for a few days and then
back on the
road and when I'm in all these countries
and I travel all around the world
meeting with large corporations from the
coca-colas to The Hondas to even the
startups that are up and coming or the
ones that have raised a billion plus
dollars in venture
capital A lot of them believe that hey
with
AI we can do less in marketing and just
have the tools do everything for us and
we don't need to worry about the rest oh
Google will just release AI in their ad
platform so we don't need to worry about
having people help manage our
ads and a lot of companies are starting
to think this way but this is going to
be a big mistake I love Google if you
ever have worked with any of their ad
reps that help you with AdWords you'll
find that it usually doesn't produce as
good as results as you just doing it
in-house internally or hiring another
external
consultant so if you're using AI to just
be your savior and do everything for you
you're making a mistake but if you use
it as assistance something to help you
become more efficient something to help
you with your research something to help
you get more done out of the time or
analyze your analytics and figure out
what's wrong these are all great things
but you need a figure out a way to
differentiate yourself and the easiest
way that I see is give away something
for free that people are used to paying
for and not something that they're used
to paying a dollar for ideally something
that they're used to paying 10 2050 $100
for the more expensive it is and the
more you give it away for free the more
organic and word of mouth you're going
to end up creating and virality you're
going to end up getting and you're like
huh this is actually easier than doing
marketing and what I found is cheaper
than buying ads if I had to buy the
traffic from gole gole AdWords we did a
calculation on this that we're getting
from all our tools to generate those
same amount of leads it would cost this
no joke $1 million a
month it would be hard to make the
economics work that's the power of
giving away something for free that's
how you stand out when everyone else is
using Ai and is doing the same wallo
stuff as everyone else thank you for
your time I hope you guys use it best of
luck